README.md, before:

# 💻Host a WordPress Website on AWS☁️

Hi! Welcome to my repository containing my AWS Project I've have undertaken on my Cloud joruney⚡️:

In this repository you will see a description of the project, low and high level architecture, scripting files and information on other key assets that I have used to develop this project as part of my portfolio and progressive development.

## **WordPress Website Page**

[www.luxelimosrentals.com](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1Gy5ZhBRLFuDI_Mi-Fpw_jSVhp-mOQ7mo/view?usp=sharing)

## **Project Overview**

This project demonstrates how to host a WordPress website on AWS, utilizing various AWS services for a scalable, secure, and highly available architecture. The key components include VPC, EC2 instances, Application Load Balancer, Auto Scaling, Route 53, and more. The setup ensures high availability across multiple availability zones, security through security groups and SSL certificates, and scalability with auto-scaling groups.


![image](https://github.com/Otite-Git/Host-a-WordPress-Website-on-AWS/assets/154989610/818e5ec1-11d5-4e59-9c7b-ad6b3308917b)
- - - 
## **Architecture**

1. **Virtual Private Cloud (VPC):** Created with Public and Private Subnets in 2 availability zones to segregate different components and enhance security.
2. **Public Subnets:** Used for infrastructure components like the NAT Gateway and Application Load Balancer.
3. **Internet Gateway:** Enables communication between instances in the VPC and the internet.
4. **Private Subnets:** Used to host the web server, designed to serve web pages and applications over the internet securely.
5. **EC2 Instances:** Utilised to host the WordPress website, accessible via an EC2 Instance Connect Endpoint.
6. **Web Server and Data Server:** Deployed in Private Subnets to protect the backend servers.
7. **Application Load Balancer:** Distributes web traffic across an Auto Scaling Group of EC2 instances in two availability zones for high availability and fault tolerance.
8. **Availability Zones:** Ensures high availability and fault tolerance by deploying resources across multiple zones.
9. **Resources:** NAT Gateway, Bastion Host, and Application Load Balancer are deployed in Public Subnets.
10. **Auto Scaling Group:** Dynamically manages EC2 instances to ensure scalability, fault tolerance, and elasticity.
11. **Route 53:** Used for domain name registration and DNS record management.
12. **WordPress:** The core web application platform used to host the website.
13. **SSL:** Secures the website with an SSL certificate.
14. **Security Groups:** Acts as a network firewall to control traffic.
15. **Instances:** Configured to access the internet via the NAT Gateway, even in private subnets.
16. **GitHub:** Used for version control and collaboration, storing web files.
17. **Certificate Manager:** Manages SSL/TLS certificates to secure application communications.
18. **SNS:** Simple Notification Service is configured to alert about activities within the Auto Scaling Group.
19. **EFS:** Used for a shared file system.
20. **RDS:** Used for database management.

## **Deployment Steps**

### VPC Setup
1. Create a VPC with public and private subnets across two availability zones.
2. Set up Internet Gateway and attach it to the VPC.
3. Create a NAT Gateway in the public subnet for internet access from private subnets.

### Security and Gateway Configuration
1. Configure security groups to allow necessary inbound and outbound traffic.
2. Set up Route 53 for domain name registration and DNS management.
3. Use AWS Certificate Manager to manage SSL/TLS certificates for secure communication.

### EC2 and Application Setup
1. Launch EC2 instances in private subnets for hosting the WordPress application.
2. Set up Application Load Balancer in public subnets for distributing traffic.
3. Configure Auto Scaling Group for EC2 instances to ensure scalability.

### WordPress Installation
1. Use provided scripts to install and configure Apache, PHP, MySQL, and WordPress on EC2 instances.
2. Mount Amazon EFS to EC2 instances for shared file storage.
3. Secure the WordPress site using the SSL certificate.

## **Repository Structure**

- **Deployment Scripts:** Contains scripts for setting up and configuring WordPress on EC2 instances.
- **Architectural Diagrams:** Visual representation of the architecture and setup.
- **Configuration Files:** Includes files for configuring AWS resources and services.
- **Documentation:** Detailed documentation on setup, configuration, and usage.

## **Deployment Scripts**

### WordPress Installation Script

This script sets up the WordPress application on an EC2 instance, including Apache, PHP, MySQL, and mounting the Amazon EFS.

```bash
# Create root user
sudo su

# Update software packages on the EC2 instance
sudo yum update -y

# Create an HTML directory
sudo mkdir -p /var/www/html

# Environment variable for EFS DNS name
EFS_DNS_NAME=fs-064e9505819af10a4.efs.us-east-1.amazonaws.com

# Mount the EFS to the HTML directory
sudo mount -t nfs4 -o nfsvers=4.1,rsize=1048576,wsize=1048576,hard,timeo=600,retrans=2,noresvport "$EFS_DNS_NAME":/ /var/www/html

# Install Apache web server, enable it to start on boot, and start the server
sudo yum install -y httpd
sudo systemctl enable httpd
sudo systemctl start httpd

# Install PHP 8 with necessary extensions for WordPress
sudo dnf install -y php php-cli php-cgi php-curl php-mbstring php-gd php-mysqlnd php-gettext php-json php-xml php-fpm php-intl php-zip php-bcmath php-ctype php-fileinfo php-openssl php-pdo php-tokenizer

# Install MySQL 8 community repository
sudo wget https://dev.mysql.com/get/mysql80-community-release-el9-1.noarch.rpm
sudo dnf install -y mysql80-community-release-el9-1.noarch.rpm
sudo rpm --import https://repo.mysql.com/RPM-GPG-KEY-mysql-2023
sudo dnf repolist enabled | grep "mysql.*-community.*"
sudo dnf install -y mysql-community-server

# Start and enable MySQL server
sudo systemctl start mysqld
sudo systemctl enable mysqld

# Set permissions
sudo usermod -a -G apache ec2-user
sudo chown -R ec2-user:apache /var/www
sudo chmod 2775 /var/www && find /var/www -type d -exec sudo chmod 2775 {} \;
sudo find /var/www -type f -exec sudo chmod 0664 {} \;
sudo chown apache:apache -R /var/www/html

# Download and extract WordPress files
wget https://wordpress.org/latest.tar.gz
tar -xzf latest.tar.gz
sudo cp -r wordpress/* /var/www/html/

# Create the wp-config.php file
sudo cp /var/www/html/wp-config-sample.php /var/www/html/wp-config.php

# Edit the wp-config.php file
sudo vi /var/www/html/wp-config.php

# Restart the web server
sudo service httpd restart
```

### Auto Scaling Group Launch Template Script

This script configures new EC2 instances in the Auto Scaling Group with the necessary software and settings.

```bash
#!/bin/bash
# Update software packages on the EC2 instance
sudo yum update -y

# Install Apache web server, enable it to start on boot, and start the server
sudo yum install -y httpd
sudo systemctl enable httpd
sudo systemctl start httpd

# Install PHP 8 with necessary extensions for WordPress
sudo dnf install -y php php-cli php-cgi php-curl php-mbstring php-gd php-mysqlnd php-gettext php-json php-xml php-fpm php-intl php-zip php-bcmath php-ctype php-fileinfo php-openssl php-pdo php-tokenizer

# Install MySQL 8 community repository
sudo wget https://dev.mysql.com/get/mysql80-community-release-el9-1.noarch.rpm
sudo dnf install -y mysql80-community-release-el9-1.noarch.rpm
sudo rpm --import https://repo.mysql.com/RPM-GPG-KEY-mysql-2023
sudo dnf repolist enabled | grep "mysql.*-community.*"
sudo dnf install -y mysql-community-server

# Start and enable MySQL server
sudo systemctl start mysqld
sudo systemctl enable mysqld

# Environment variable for EFS DNS name
EFS_DNS_NAME=fs-02d3268559aa2a318.efs.us-east-1.amazonaws.com

# Mount the EFS to the HTML directory
echo "$EFS_DNS_NAME:/ /var/www/html nfs4 nfsvers=4.1,rsize=1048576,wsize=1048576,hard,timeo=600,retrans=2 0 0" >> /etc/fstab
mount -a

# Set permissions
sudo chown apache:apache -R /var/www/html

# Restart the web server
sudo service httpd restart
```

## **How to Use**

1. Clone this repository to your local machine.
2. Follow the AWS documentation to create the required resources (VPC, subnets, Internet Gateway, etc.) as outlined in the architecture overview.
3. Use the provided scripts to set up the WordPress application on EC2 instances within the VPC.
4. Configure the Auto Scaling Group, Load Balancer, and other services as per the architecture.
5. Access the WordPress website through the Load Balancer's DNS name.

## **Additional Resources**

- **AWS Documentation:** Refer to the [AWS documentation](https://aws.amazon.com/documentation/) for detailed guides on setting up VPC, EC2, Auto Scaling, Load Balancer, and other services.
- **GitHub Repository Files:** Refer to [Otite-Git/Host-WorPress](https://github.com/Otite-Git/Host-a-WordPress-Website-on-AWS.git) to access the repository files for scripts, architectural diagrams, and configuration files necessary for deploying the website.

## **Contributing**

Contributions to this project are welcome! Please fork the repository and submit a pull request with your enhancements.

## **License**

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the LICENSE file for details.

## **What problem did I solve by completing this project?**

1. **Scalability:** I was able to effectively Handle varying levels of web traffic efficiently through using AWS services like Auto Scaling and Elastic Load Balancing to automatically adjust the number of running instances based on traffic demand.
 
2. **Performance Optimisation:** I solved the problem of slow loading times and handling varying levels of web traffic effciently using AWS services like Auto Scaling and Elastic Load Balancing to automatically adjust the number of running instances based on traffic demand.

3. **Database Management:** Using AWS to host WordPress enabled me to effectively manage and optimise the database that supports WordPress through using Amazon RDS for managed MySQL a databases, enabling read replicas for load distribution.

4. **High Availability:** I Minimised downtime and ensuring continuous availability by deploying applications across 2 Availability Zones AZ1 & AZ2, using Elastic Load Balancing to distribute traffic, and setting up failover configurations.

5. **Cost Management:** I solved the problem of having high costs by supporting the deployment of a cost effective solution managing and optimising the costs associated with AWS resources. This was achieved through monitoring usage with AWS Cost Explorer, using AWS Budgets to set alerts, and leveraging Reserved Instances and Savings Plans for cost savings.

## **What issue did I face while working on the project and how did I resolve that issue?**
  
- **WordPress credentials issues:** I had faced the issue of my WordPress credentials automatically registering through an auto-fill feature generating a strong passsword which I did not record. I solved this issue by firstly deleting the existing EFS RDS and EC2 Instance and creating new EFS RDS and EC2 Instances. Once created, I then SSH'ed into the instance via Amazon Linux where I was to re-nstall the WordPress script which consisted of setting up the WordPress application on an EC2 instance, including Apache, PHP, MySQL, and mounting the Amazon EFS.

- **Increasing Costs:** The challenge of increasing cost also became a concern which I was able to resolve thorugh by firstly enabalbing MFA (Multi Factor Authentication) to enhance the security access of my root user account and enable best practice. Through this, I reduced the risk of fraudulent access to my account and using it resulting in high usage cost. Furthermore, I used AWS budgets and Cost Explorer to effectively manage costs by settting alerting and identifying which service was a high usage cost through visibility of the cost usage graph.  
 
- **AWS Linux and Bash:** This project gave me the ability to increase my skills in AWS Linux and bash as I was required to use the EC2 Instance to install the WordPress script

- **Networking:** I further my knowledge on Networking through inplementation of tools such as the Internet Gateway. This enabled the resources within the VPC Public Subnet to connect to the internet, and resources within the VPC Private Subnet to connect to the internet via the NAT Gateway. The use of the NAT Gateway enables resources like the EC2 Instances on the Private App Subnet to access the internet and download package updates using 'Sudo Yum update' through SSH'ing into the EC2 instance. So there is a requirement for the EC2 Instance to have access to the internet without external users on the internet gaining access to the EC2 Instance.

   **WordPress credentials issues:**

Contributions to this project are welcome! Please fork the repository and submit a pull request with your enhancements.

Commit message:

README.md
included lessons learnt, challenges and issues resolved

README.md, after:

# 💻Host a WordPress Website on AWS☁️

Hi! Welcome to my repository containing my AWS Project I've have undertaken on my Cloud joruney⚡️:

In this repository you will see a description of the project, low and high level architecture, scripting files and information on other key assets that I have used to develop this project as part of my portfolio and progressive development.

## **WordPress Website Page**

[www.luxelimosrentals.com](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1Gy5ZhBRLFuDI_Mi-Fpw_jSVhp-mOQ7mo/view?usp=sharing)

## **Project Overview**

This project demonstrates how to host a WordPress website on AWS, utilizing various AWS services for a scalable, secure, and highly available architecture. The key components include VPC, EC2 instances, Application Load Balancer, Auto Scaling, Route 53, and more. The setup ensures high availability across multiple availability zones, security through security groups and SSL certificates, and scalability with auto-scaling groups.


![image](https://github.com/Otite-Git/Host-a-WordPress-Website-on-AWS/assets/154989610/818e5ec1-11d5-4e59-9c7b-ad6b3308917b)
- - - 
## **Architecture**

1. **Virtual Private Cloud (VPC):** Created with Public and Private Subnets in 2 availability zones to segregate different components and enhance security.
2. **Public Subnets:** Used for infrastructure components like the NAT Gateway and Application Load Balancer.
3. **Internet Gateway:** Enables communication between instances in the VPC and the internet.
4. **Private Subnets:** Used to host the web server, designed to serve web pages and applications over the internet securely.
5. **EC2 Instances:** Utilised to host the WordPress website, accessible via an EC2 Instance Connect Endpoint.
6. **Web Server and Data Server:** Deployed in Private Subnets to protect the backend servers.
7. **Application Load Balancer:** Distributes web traffic across an Auto Scaling Group of EC2 instances in two availability zones for high availability and fault tolerance.
8. **Availability Zones:** Ensures high availability and fault tolerance by deploying resources across multiple zones.
9. **Resources:** NAT Gateway, Bastion Host, and Application Load Balancer are deployed in Public Subnets.
10. **Auto Scaling Group:** Dynamically manages EC2 instances to ensure scalability, fault tolerance, and elasticity.
11. **Route 53:** Used for domain name registration and DNS record management.
12. **WordPress:** The core web application platform used to host the website.
13. **SSL:** Secures the website with an SSL certificate.
14. **Security Groups:** Acts as a network firewall to control traffic.
15. **Instances:** Configured to access the internet via the NAT Gateway, even in private subnets.
16. **GitHub:** Used for version control and collaboration, storing web files.
17. **Certificate Manager:** Manages SSL/TLS certificates to secure application communications.
18. **SNS:** Simple Notification Service is configured to alert about activities within the Auto Scaling Group.
19. **EFS:** Used for a shared file system.
20. **RDS:** Used for database management.

## **Deployment Steps**

### VPC Setup
1. Create a VPC with public and private subnets across two availability zones.
2. Set up Internet Gateway and attach it to the VPC.
3. Create a NAT Gateway in the public subnet for internet access from private subnets.

### Security and Gateway Configuration
1. Configure security groups to allow necessary inbound and outbound traffic.
2. Set up Route 53 for domain name registration and DNS management.
3. Use AWS Certificate Manager to manage SSL/TLS certificates for secure communication.

### EC2 and Application Setup
1. Launch EC2 instances in private subnets for hosting the WordPress application.
2. Set up Application Load Balancer in public subnets for distributing traffic.
3. Configure Auto Scaling Group for EC2 instances to ensure scalability.

### WordPress Installation
1. Use provided scripts to install and configure Apache, PHP, MySQL, and WordPress on EC2 instances.
2. Mount Amazon EFS to EC2 instances for shared file storage.
3. Secure the WordPress site using the SSL certificate.

## **Repository Structure**

- **Deployment Scripts:** Contains scripts for setting up and configuring WordPress on EC2 instances.
- **Architectural Diagrams:** Visual representation of the architecture and setup.
- **Configuration Files:** Includes files for configuring AWS resources and services.
- **Documentation:** Detailed documentation on setup, configuration, and usage.

## **Deployment Scripts**

### WordPress Installation Script

This script sets up the WordPress application on an EC2 instance, including Apache, PHP, MySQL, and mounting the Amazon EFS.

```bash
# Create root user
sudo su

# Update software packages on the EC2 instance
sudo yum update -y

# Create an HTML directory
sudo mkdir -p /var/www/html

# Environment variable for EFS DNS name
EFS_DNS_NAME=fs-064e9505819af10a4.efs.us-east-1.amazonaws.com

# Mount the EFS to the HTML directory
sudo mount -t nfs4 -o nfsvers=4.1,rsize=1048576,wsize=1048576,hard,timeo=600,retrans=2,noresvport "$EFS_DNS_NAME":/ /var/www/html

# Install Apache web server, enable it to start on boot, and start the server
sudo yum install -y httpd
sudo systemctl enable httpd
sudo systemctl start httpd

# Install PHP 8 with necessary extensions for WordPress
sudo dnf install -y php php-cli php-cgi php-curl php-mbstring php-gd php-mysqlnd php-gettext php-json php-xml php-fpm php-intl php-zip php-bcmath php-ctype php-fileinfo php-openssl php-pdo php-tokenizer

# Install MySQL 8 community repository
sudo wget https://dev.mysql.com/get/mysql80-community-release-el9-1.noarch.rpm
sudo dnf install -y mysql80-community-release-el9-1.noarch.rpm
sudo rpm --import https://repo.mysql.com/RPM-GPG-KEY-mysql-2023
sudo dnf repolist enabled | grep "mysql.*-community.*"
sudo dnf install -y mysql-community-server

# Start and enable MySQL server
sudo systemctl start mysqld
sudo systemctl enable mysqld

# Set permissions
sudo usermod -a -G apache ec2-user
sudo chown -R ec2-user:apache /var/www
sudo chmod 2775 /var/www && find /var/www -type d -exec sudo chmod 2775 {} \;
sudo find /var/www -type f -exec sudo chmod 0664 {} \;
sudo chown apache:apache -R /var/www/html

# Download and extract WordPress files
wget https://wordpress.org/latest.tar.gz
tar -xzf latest.tar.gz
sudo cp -r wordpress/* /var/www/html/

# Create the wp-config.php file
sudo cp /var/www/html/wp-config-sample.php /var/www/html/wp-config.php

# Edit the wp-config.php file
sudo vi /var/www/html/wp-config.php

# Restart the web server
sudo service httpd restart
```

### Auto Scaling Group Launch Template Script

This script configures new EC2 instances in the Auto Scaling Group with the necessary software and settings.

```bash
#!/bin/bash
# Update software packages on the EC2 instance
sudo yum update -y

# Install Apache web server, enable it to start on boot, and start the server
sudo yum install -y httpd
sudo systemctl enable httpd
sudo systemctl start httpd

# Install PHP 8 with necessary extensions for WordPress
sudo dnf install -y php php-cli php-cgi php-curl php-mbstring php-gd php-mysqlnd php-gettext php-json php-xml php-fpm php-intl php-zip php-bcmath php-ctype php-fileinfo php-openssl php-pdo php-tokenizer

# Install MySQL 8 community repository
sudo wget https://dev.mysql.com/get/mysql80-community-release-el9-1.noarch.rpm
sudo dnf install -y mysql80-community-release-el9-1.noarch.rpm
sudo rpm --import https://repo.mysql.com/RPM-GPG-KEY-mysql-2023
sudo dnf repolist enabled | grep "mysql.*-community.*"
sudo dnf install -y mysql-community-server

# Start and enable MySQL server
sudo systemctl start mysqld
sudo systemctl enable mysqld

# Environment variable for EFS DNS name
EFS_DNS_NAME=fs-02d3268559aa2a318.efs.us-east-1.amazonaws.com

# Mount the EFS to the HTML directory
echo "$EFS_DNS_NAME:/ /var/www/html nfs4 nfsvers=4.1,rsize=1048576,wsize=1048576,hard,timeo=600,retrans=2 0 0" >> /etc/fstab
mount -a

# Set permissions
sudo chown apache:apache -R /var/www/html

# Restart the web server
sudo service httpd restart
```

## **How to Use**

1. Clone this repository to your local machine.
2. Follow the AWS documentation to create the required resources (VPC, subnets, Internet Gateway, etc.) as outlined in the architecture overview.
3. Use the provided scripts to set up the WordPress application on EC2 instances within the VPC.
4. Configure the Auto Scaling Group, Load Balancer, and other services as per the architecture.
5. Access the WordPress website through the Load Balancer's DNS name.

## **Additional Resources**

- **AWS Documentation:** Refer to the [AWS documentation](https://aws.amazon.com/documentation/) for detailed guides on setting up VPC, EC2, Auto Scaling, Load Balancer, and other services.
- **GitHub Repository Files:** Refer to [Otite-Git/Host-WorPress](https://github.com/Otite-Git/Host-a-WordPress-Website-on-AWS.git) to access the repository files for scripts, architectural diagrams, and configuration files necessary for deploying the website.

## **Contributing**

Contributions to this project are welcome! Please fork the repository and submit a pull request with your enhancements.

## **License**

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the LICENSE file for details.

## **What problems did I solve by completing this project?**

1. **Scalability:** I was able to effectively Handle varying levels of web traffic efficiently through using AWS services like Auto Scaling and Elastic Load Balancing to automatically adjust the number of running instances based on traffic demand.
 
2. **Performance Optimisation:** I solved the problem of slow loading times and handling varying levels of web traffic effciently using AWS services like Auto Scaling and Elastic Load Balancing to automatically adjust the number of running instances based on traffic demand.

3. **Database Management:** Using AWS to host WordPress enabled me to effectively manage and optimise the database that supports WordPress through using Amazon RDS for managed MySQL a databases, enabling read replicas for load distribution.

4. **High Availability:** I Minimised downtime and ensuring continuous availability by deploying applications across 2 Availability Zones AZ1 & AZ2, using Elastic Load Balancing to distribute traffic, and setting up failover configurations.

5. **Cost Management:** I solved the problem of having high costs by supporting the deployment of a cost effective solution managing and optimising the costs associated with AWS resources. This was achieved through monitoring usage with AWS Cost Explorer, using AWS Budgets to set alerts, and leveraging Reserved Instances and Savings Plans for cost savings.

## **What issues did I face while working on the project and how did I resolve that issue?**
  
- **WordPress credentials issues:** I had faced the issue of my WordPress credentials automatically registering through an auto-fill feature generating a strong passsword which I did not record. I solved this issue by firstly deleting the existing EFS RDS and EC2 Instance and creating new EFS RDS and EC2 Instances. Once created, I then SSH'ed into the instance via Amazon Linux where I was to re-nstall the WordPress script which consisted of setting up the WordPress application on an EC2 instance, including Apache, PHP, MySQL, and mounting the Amazon EFS.

- **Increasing Costs:** The challenge of increasing cost also became a concern which I was able to resolve thorugh by firstly enabalbing MFA (Multi Factor Authentication) to enhance the security access of my root user account and enable best practice. Through this, I reduced the risk of fraudulent access to my account and using it resulting in high usage cost. Furthermore, I used AWS budgets and Cost Explorer to effectively manage costs by settting alerting and identifying which service was a high usage cost through visibility of the cost usage graph.  

 ## **What overall lessons did I learn?**
 
- **AWS Linux and Bash:** This project gave me the ability to increase my skills in AWS Linux and bash as I was required to use the EC2 Instance to install the WordPress script

- **Networking:** I further my knowledge on Networking through inplementation of tools such as the Internet Gateway. This enabled the resources within the VPC Public Subnet to connect to the internet, and resources within the VPC Private Subnet to connect to the internet via the NAT Gateway. The use of the NAT Gateway enables resources like the EC2 Instances on the Private App Subnet to access the internet and download package updates using 'Sudo Yum update' through SSH'ing into the EC2 instance. So there is a requirement for the EC2 Instance to have access to the internet without external users on the internet gaining access to the EC2 Instance.

- **IAM Management and Best Practice:** As part ot IAM Management best practice, I identified that it is not recommended to user a root account for cloud environment creation. Going forward, I increased the acess robustness of my root using account by regularly changing  passwords, using MFA (Mult Factor Authentication), removing access keys to the root account and reducing overall root user account user for sercurity perposes.

-  **IAM User Creation and Best Practice:** Through doing this project, I also identified that going forward, best practice would be to create a new IAM user for myself and only grant required access also setting up a MFA for the new user making this the primary use account going forward. This is not only best practice, but permits the use of defining a boundary of services that I only want to use. For example, am IAM user cannot be charged for a NAT Gateway, if they don't have permissions to configure one in the first place.
